[BD-3912] Android Updates Activities (#8932)
braze-inc/braze-docs: _docs/_developer_guide/platforms/android/live_activities.md

---
nav_title: Live Activities
article_title: Live Activities for the Android Braze SDK

> platform: Swift

Author: ```suggestion
platform: Android
```

page_order: 6

> description: "This article covers using Braze to manage your Live Activities tokens for the Swift SDK."

Author: ```suggestion
description: "This article covers using Braze to manage your Live Activities tokens for the Android Braze SDK."
```

---

# Live Activities

> Live Activities are persistent, interactive notifications displayed on your lock screen, allowing you to keep an eye on things in real-time. Because they appear on the lock screen, Live Activities ensure that your notifications won't be missed. Because they're persistent, you can display up-to-date content to your users without even having them unlock their phone. 

## About Live Activities

> ![A delivery tracker live activity on an iPhone lockscreen. A status bar with a car is almost half-way filled up. Text reads "2 min until pickup"]({% image_buster /assets/img/swift/live_activities/example_2.png %}){: style="max-width:40%;float:right;margin-left:15px;"}

Author: ```suggestion
![ALT_TEXT]()
```

Live Activities present a combination of static information and dynamic information that you update. For example, you can create a Live Activity that provides a status tracker for a delivery. This Live Activity would have your company's name as static information, as well as a dynamic "Time to delivery" that would be updated as the delivery driver approaches its destination.

As a developer, you can use Braze to manage your Live Activity lifecycles, make calls to the Braze REST API to make Live Activity updates, and have all subscribed devices receive the update as soon as possible. And, because you're managing Live Activities through Braze, you can use them in tandem with your other messaging channels&mdash;push notifications, in-app messages, Content Cards&mdash;to drive adoption.

## Prerequisites 

> _$TODO_

Author: @torossian97 , do you know what if any prerequisites there are for this? (other than integrating the android sdk).

## Implementing a Live Activity

### Step 1: Add configuration files

Open your terminal and clone the [$TODO-REPOSITORY-LINK]():

```bash
git clone git@github.com:braze-inc/$TODO.git
```

Move the following files to your Android project:

- Place [`FullyCustomNotificationFactory.kt`]() in your application.
- Place [`liveupdate_large.xml`]() and [`liveupdate_small.xml`]() in your layout resources.

Your directory structure should be similar to the following:

```plaintext
Your-Android-Project/
├── app/
│   └── src/
│       └── main/
│           └── java/
│               └── com/
│                   └── yourcompany/
│                       └── yourapp/
│                           └── FullyCustomNotificationFactory.kt
└── res/
    └── layout/
        ├── liveupdate_large.xml
        └── liveupdate_small.xml
```

> In _$TODO_, update `FullyCustomNotificationFactory.getTeamInfo()` to return the drawables already being used in your app.

Reviewer: So [this](https://github.com/braze-inc/live-notifications-guide-android/blob/main/FullyCustomNotificationFactory.kt#L66-L102) method would just need to be updated with the shortcode the devs want to use and the full name and drawable asset desired. We can change it to use the Owl teams, and hopefully we still have the assets from like activities?

> In _$TODO_, update `FullyCustomNotificationFactory.getTeamInfo()` to return the drawables already being used in your app.

Author: I believe we still have the assets, so i can add those. Is this specific line ment to be similar to the example in the swift live activity docs, [step 1](https://www.braze.com/docs/developer_guide/platforms/swift/live_activities/#step-1-create-an-activity)?

> In _$TODO_, update `FullyCustomNotificationFactory.getTeamInfo()` to return the drawables already being used in your app.

Author: So it would be something like this:

``````markdown
Now you can use `FullyCustomNotificationFactory` with an existing method in your code to return drawables in your app. In the following example, `FullyCustomNotificationFactory.getTeamInfo()` is used to...

```kotlin
Some example here...
```
``````

{% tabs %}
{% tab Java %}
```java
$TODO
```
{% endtab %}
{% tab Kotlin %}
```kotlin
$TODO
```
{% endtab %}
{% endtabs %}

### Step 2: Set the custom notification factory

> In _$TODO_, add the [`customBrazeNotificationFactory` method](https://braze-inc.github.io/braze-android-sdk/kdoc/braze-android-sdk/com.braze/-braze/-companion/custom-braze-notification-factory.html?query=var%20customBrazeNotificationFactory:%20IBrazeNotificationFactory?) to your application class.

Author: @torossian97 , do you know where some would update this?

Reviewer: Sorry, what're you wondering about? I think the hierarchy you showed displays where this file would live very well :)

            "WBF" -> Pair("Wild Bird Fund", R.drawable.team_wbf)
            "OWL" -> Pair("Owl Rehab", R.drawable.team_owl)
            else  -> Pair("Unknown", R.drawable.notification_small_icon)
        }
    }
}
```

### Step 4: Set the custom notification factory

In your application class, use [`customBrazeNotificationFactory`](https://braze-inc.github.io/braze-android-sdk/kdoc/braze-android-sdk/com.braze/-braze/-companion/custom-braze-notification-factory.html?query=var%20customBrazeNotificationFactory:%20IBrazeNotificationFactory?)to set your custom notification factory.

```kotlin
import com.braze.Braze

class MyApplication : Application() {
    override fun onCreate() {
        super.onCreate()

        // Tell Braze to use your custom factory for notifications
        Braze.customBrazeNotificationFactory = MyCustomNotificationFactory()
    }
}
```

### Step 5: Send the activity

You can use the [`/messages/send`]({{site.baseurl}}/api/endpoints/messaging/send_messages/post_send_messages) REST API endpoint to send a push notification to a user's Android device.

#### Example curl command

Superb Owl sent their request using the following curl command:

```bash

> curl -X POST "https://BRAZE_REST_ENPOINT/messages/send" \

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
curl -X POST "https://BRAZE_REST_ENDPOINT/messages/send" \
```

  -H "Authorization: Bearer {REST_API_KEY}" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  --data '{
    "external_user_ids": ["USER_ID"],
    "messages": {
      "android_push": {
        "title": "WBF vs OWL",
        "alert": "2 to 4 1:33 Q4",
        "extra": {
          "live_update": "true",
          "team1": "WBF",
          "team2": "OWL",
          "score1": "2",
          "score2": "4",
          "time": "1:33",
          "quarter": "Q4"
        },

>         "notification_id": ASSIGNED_NOTIFICATION_ID

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        "notification_id": "YOUR_ASSIGNED_NOTIFICATION_ID"
```

Author: *Note that we avoid using `YOUR` in placeholders.

Reviewer 2: why? to me this looked like a variable instead of a placeholder.

Author: typically because it's not specific enough, as opposed to say `BRAZE_NOTIFICATION_ID` or similar.

also to that point, in our meeting later today for code samples/placeholders, that is something i'd like to discuss: i.e. should we be doing `{PLACEHOLDER_NAME}` or similar to denote that something is a placeholder, because i definitely agree with your concern here.

happy to apply that formatting to this page in the meantime if you think that would be helpful in the short-term 👍🏽

Reviewer: Yeah I agree we need tighter conventions for placeholders vs variables, let's discuss today and make the appropriate tweaks. I think "ASSIGNED_NOTIFICATION_ID" makes sense as far as the text is concerned

      }
    }
  }'
```

{% alert tip %}
While curl commands are helpful for testing, we recommend handling this call in your backend where you're already handling your [iOS Live Activities]({{site.baseurl}}/developer_guide/platforms/swift/live_activities/).
{% endalert %}

#### Request parameters

| Key                          | Description |
|------------------------------|------------|
| `REST_API_KEY`               | A Braze REST API key with `$TODO` permissions. <br><br> This can be created in the Braze dashboard from **Settings** > **API Keys**. |

> | `BRAZE_REST_ENPOINT`         | Your REST endpoint URL. Your endpoint will depend on the [Braze URL for your instance]({{site.baseurl}}/api/basics/#endpoints). |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `BRAZE_REST_ENDPOINT`         | Your REST endpoint URL. Your endpoint will depend on the [Braze URL for your instance]({{site.baseurl}}/api/basics/#endpoints). |
```

---
nav_title: Live Activities
article_title: Live Activities for the Android Braze SDK
platform: Android
page_order: 6

> description: "This article covers using Braze to manage your Live Activities tokens for the Android Braze SDK."

Author: ```suggestion
description: "Learn how to implement Live Activities for the Android Braze SDK."
```

---

# Live Activities

> > Learn how to implement Live Activities for the Android Braze SDK. Live Activities are persistent, interactive notifications that are displayed directly on the lock screen, allowing users to get dynamic, realtime updates&#8212;without unlocking their device.

Reviewer: `persistent` -> custom

Reviewer: I also think maybe we should reference the iOS live activities to allude to the fact that that's the behaviour we're emulating. Android 16 will eventually have "Live Updates", which is Androids native equivalent. In the mean time, we're basing it off iOS behaviour though. Thoughts?

> > Live Activities are persistent, interactive notifications displayed on your lock screen, allowing you to keep an eye on things in real-time. Because they appear on the lock screen, Live Activities ensure that your notifications won't be missed. Because they're persistent, you can display up-to-date content to your users without even having them unlock their phone. 

Author: ```suggestion
> Learn how to implement Live Activities for the Android Braze SDK. Live Activities are persistent, interactive notifications that are displayed directly on the lock screen, allowing users to get dynamic, realtime updates&#8212;without unlocking their device.
```

## About `IBrazeNotificationFactory`

> You can use the [`IBrazeNotificationFactory`](https://braze-inc.github.io/braze-android-sdk/kdoc/braze-android-sdk/com.braze/-i-braze-notification-factory/index.html) interface to customize how Braze push notifications are displayed. By extending `BrazeNotificationFactory`, Braze will call your factory's `createNotification()` method before the notification is displayed to the user. It will then pass one `Bundle` containing Braze push data and another `Bundle` containing custom key-value pairs sent through the Braze dashboard or REST API.

Reviewer: Is it 2 separate bundles? I think it's just 1 payload right?

Author: I took this from the iOS docs and just edited it. Is 1 bundle more accurate?

Reviewer: "It will then pass a payload containing the Braze push data and key-value pairs sent through the Braze dashboard or REST API."

> You can use the [`IBrazeNotificationFactory`](https://braze-inc.github.io/braze-android-sdk/kdoc/braze-android-sdk/com.braze/-i-braze-notification-factory/index.html) interface to customize how Braze push notifications are displayed. By extending `BrazeNotificationFactory`, Braze will call your factory's `createNotification()` method before the notification is displayed to the user. It will then pass one `Bundle` containing Braze push data and another `Bundle` containing custom key-value pairs sent through the Braze dashboard or REST API.

Author: ```suggestion
You can use the [`IBrazeNotificationFactory`](https://braze-inc.github.io/braze-android-sdk/kdoc/braze-android-sdk/com.braze/-i-braze-notification-factory/index.html) interface to customize how Braze push notifications are displayed. By extending `BrazeNotificationFactory`, Braze will call your factory's `createNotification()` method before the notification is displayed to the user. It will then pass a payload containing custom key-value pairs sent through the Braze dashboard or REST API.
```

## Implementing a Live Activity

> In this section, you'll partner with Superb Owl, the host of a popular game show where wildlife rescue teams compete to see who can save the most owls. They're looking to leverage Live Activities in their Android app, so they can display the status of an on-going match and make dynamic updates to the notification in realtime.

Author: ```suggestion
In this section, you'll partner with Superb Owl, the host of a new game show where wildlife rescue teams compete to see who can save the most owls. They're looking to leverage Live Activities in their Android app, so they can display the status of an on-going match and make dynamic updates to the notification in realtime.
```

#{% multi_lang_include developer_guide/prerequisites/android.md %}

### Step 1: Add a custom layout

You can add one or more custom Live Activity layouts to your project. These are helpful for handling how notifications are displayed when collapsed or expanded. Your directory structure should be similar to the following:

```plaintext
.
├── app/
└── res/
    └── layout/
        ├── liveupdate_collapsed.xml
        └── liveupdate_expanded.xml
```

In each XML file, create a custom layout. Superb Owl created the following layouts for their collapsed and expanded Live Activities:

{% tabs local %}
{% tab  Example: Collapsed layout %}
```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<LinearLayout xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android"
    android:layout_width="match_parent"
    android:layout_height="wrap_content"
    android:orientation="vertical">

    <TextView
        android:id="@+id/notification_title"
        style="@style/TextAppearance.Compat.Notification.Title"
        android:layout_width="wrap_content"
        android:layout_height="0dp"
        android:layout_weight="1"

>         android:text="Collapsed notification, showing only a title" />

Author: ```suggestion
```

>         android:text="Collapsed notification, showing only a title" />

Author: Need to verify text here.

Reviewer: we can delete that line

</LinearLayout>
```
{% endtab %}

{% tab Example: Expanded layout %}
{% details Show the sample code %}
```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<LinearLayout xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android"
    android:layout_width="match_parent"
    android:layout_height="wrap_content"
    android:orientation="horizontal">

    <LinearLayout
        android:layout_width="0dp"
        android:layout_weight="1"
        android:layout_gravity="center"

        android:layout_height="wrap_content"
        android:orientation="vertical">

        <ImageView
            android:id="@+id/team1logo"
            android:layout_width="wrap_content"
            android:layout_height="60dp"
            android:layout_gravity="center"
            android:src="@drawable/team_default1"/>

        <TextView
            android:id="@+id/team1name"
            android:textAlignment="center"
            android:layout_width="match_parent"
            android:layout_height="wrap_content"

>             android:text="Team 1 Name" />

Author: ```suggestion
```

>             android:text="Team 1 Name" />

Author: Need to verify text here. Isn't this set in the API call?

Reviewer: We can delete that line

    </LinearLayout>

    <LinearLayout
        android:layout_width="0dp"
        android:layout_weight="1.6"
        android:layout_gravity="center"
        android:layout_height="wrap_content"
        android:orientation="vertical">

        <TextView
            android:id="@+id/score"
            android:layout_width="match_parent"
            android:layout_height="wrap_content"
            android:text="2-4"
            android:textColor="#555555"
            android:textAlignment="center"
            android:textSize="32sp"
            android:textStyle="bold" />

        <TextView
            android:id="@+id/timeInfo"
            android:textAlignment="center"
            android:layout_width="match_parent"
            android:layout_height="wrap_content"

>             android:text="1:33 - Q4" />

Author: ```suggestion
```

>             android:text="1:33 - Q4" />

Author: Need to verify text here. Isn't this set in the API call?

Reviewer: We can delete that line

    </LinearLayout>

    <LinearLayout
        android:layout_width="0dp"
        android:layout_weight="1"
        android:layout_gravity="center"
        android:layout_height="wrap_content"
        android:orientation="vertical">

        <ImageView
            android:id="@+id/team2logo"
            android:layout_gravity="center"
            android:layout_width="wrap_content"
            android:layout_height="60dp"
            android:src="@drawable/team_default2"/>

        <TextView
            android:id="@+id/team2name"
            android:textAlignment="center"
            android:layout_width="match_parent"
            android:layout_height="wrap_content"

>             android:text="Team 2 Name" />

Author: Need to verify text here. Isn't this set in the API call?

Reviewer: We can delete that line

    </LinearLayout>
</LinearLayout>
```
{% enddetails %}
{% endtab %}
{% endtabs %}

### Step 2: Create a custom notification factory

In your application, create a new file named `MyCustomNotificationFactory.kt` that extends [`BrazeNotificationFactory`](https://braze-inc.github.io/braze-android-sdk/kdoc/braze-android-sdk/com.braze/-i-braze-notification-factory/index.html) to handle how Braze Live Activities are displayed.

In the following example, Superb Owl created a custom notification factory to display a Live Activity for on-going matches. In the [next step](#step-3-map-custom-data), they'll create a new method called `getTeamInfo` to map a team's data to the activity.

{% details Show the sample code %}
```kotlin

> package com.appboy.sample

Reviewer: I wonder if we should remove or change this first line. Could just remove it

    override fun createNotification(payload: BrazeNotificationPayload): Notification? {
        // Your existing code
        return super.createNotification(payload)
    }

    // Your new method
    private fun getTeamInfo(team: String?): Pair<String, Int> {
        return when (team) {
            "WBF" -> Pair("Wild Bird Fund", R.drawable.team_wbf)
            "OWL" -> Pair("Owl Rehab", R.drawable.team_owl)
            else  -> Pair("Unknown", R.drawable.notification_small_icon)
        }
    }
}
```

### Step 4: Set the custom notification factory

In your application class, use [`customBrazeNotificationFactory`](https://braze-inc.github.io/braze-android-sdk/kdoc/braze-android-sdk/com.braze/-braze/-companion/custom-braze-notification-factory.html?query=var%20customBrazeNotificationFactory:%20IBrazeNotificationFactory?)to set your custom notification factory.

```kotlin
import com.braze.Braze

class MyApplication : Application() {
    override fun onCreate() {
        super.onCreate()

        // Tell Braze to use your custom factory for notifications
        Braze.customBrazeNotificationFactory = MyCustomNotificationFactory()
    }
}
```

> ### Step 5: Call the `/messages/send` endpoint

Reviewer: Should this be call something like "Deliver the live activity with the /messages/send endpoint" or something like that? Flows better with step 6

> You can use the [`/messages/send`]({{site.baseurl}}/api/endpoints/messaging/send_messages/post_send_messages) REST API endpoint to deliver a push notification to a user's Android device.

Reviewer: "...to a user's Android device. Our custom factory will automatically update the notification with the data received." maybe?
